---
title: Book - Analysing Spatial Point Patterns with R
layout: master
---

# Forthcoming book

We have recently finished the book [Spatial Point Patterns:
Methodology and Applications with R][1] and it is expected to be
available for purchase by the end of the year.

While it is a general book about analysing spatial point patterns it
is tightly integrated with spatstat and may be a valuable guide to
using spatstat and used as an inspiration to what kind of analyses
can be carried out with spatstat.

[1]: https://www.crcpress.com/Spatial-Point-Patterns-Methodology-and-Applications-with-R/Baddeley-Rubak-Turner/9781482210200
"Book information and pre-order form at publisher's website"

## About the book

The book describes modern statistical methodology and software for
analysing spatial point patterns. It is aimed primarily at scientists,
across a broad range of disciplines, who need to analyse their own
point pattern data. It provides clear explanations and practical
advice on powerful statistical methodology for researchers who are
results-oriented, together with authoritative guidance about the
validity and applicability of different methods. Case studies in the
book, and online supplementary examples and code, make it easy for
readers to begin analysing their own data.

The book is not biased toward any particular area of science.
Consequently, it will cover a wider range of techniques than other
books on spatial point pattern analysis which focus on a particular
domain (ecology, geography, biology etc). For example, the chapter on
`Intensity' will cover not only those techniques that are appropriate
in spatial epidemiology (e.g. nonparametric kernel estimation of point
process intensity and relative risk) but also those which are popular
in geoscience (e.g. parametric modelling of intensity as a function of
covariates using logistic regression).

Our book will explain the core principles of statistical methodology
for spatial point patterns. `Methodology' is more than just a
collection of tools: it is a systematic, principled, coherent approach
to analysing data. These principles guide the appropriate choice of
tool for each situation, and guide the correct interpretation of the
results of analysis. By explaining the core principles we also make
the methodology more comprehensible.

The book covers *advanced techniques*, yet it is *focused on
application*. The availability of powerful software makes it possible
for us to offer up-to-date, advanced statistical methodology without
the sophisticated mathematical derivations and without the
computational nitty-gritty, jumping straight from the core principles
to the applications.

In presenting "modern" statistical methodology we shall include many
older established techniques. The *ad hoc* methods popular in the
1980's (e.g. Ripley's K-function and its simulation envelopes) still
have their place, but now have to share the limelight with newer
methods (e.g. parametric models, likelihood devices, estimating
equations, model diagnostics) that are also much closer to mainstream
statistical science. Many of these newer techniques have not yet been
covered in any book. Rather than following the traditional structure
of books on point process statistics, the book will be *structured
around standard statistical concepts* as much as possible. This is
both a pedagogical decision (to make the book more easily
comprehensible to people who are trained in basic statistical
concepts) and a scientific goal (to bring spatial point process
analysis closer to the statistical mainstream).

The proliferation of research in spatial statistics has also led to
some errors, misconceptions and confusion in the literature. An
example is the confusion over the statistical significance of
simulation envelopes. This book will draw attention to many such
common errors and misunderstandings. Written by leading researchers
with a formidable combination of expertise and experience, the book
will serve as an authoritative source of correct information about
statistical tools for spatial point patterns.
